# flu_vaccine

The seasonal influenza (flu) vaccine is designed to protect against those influenza viruses predicted to circulate during the upcoming flu season. However, influenza viruses undergo genetic changes over time; due to rapid mutations, in particular in the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase genes, seasonal influenza vaccines must be reviewed and updated annually. The annual composition of the flu vaccine is determined by the viruses predicted to circulate in the coming season and, to some extent, the immune responses produced against those viruses included in the previous season’s vaccine. We use phylogenetic trees reconstructed from hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) sequences from human influenza viruses (using human isolates from 1980-2020), together with counts of epitope site polymorphisms in hemagglutinin, to predict which influenza virus strains are likely to persist in the next flu season. We define a set of features which we compute for each taxon, using the epitope polymorphisms and structures of the HA and NA phylogenies.  We train a support vector machine to classify taxa as to whether they are likely to be ``successful" (circulate in the coming seasons) or not. We obtain accuracies of 0.75-0.89 and a classifier `area under the curve' (AUC) of 0.83-0.91. Among the set of successful strains in each year, we propose several for inclusion in the next flu vaccine using epitope distances. We identify similar candidate strains for vaccine inclusion to those proposed by the World Health Organization, suggesting that this approach can help inform vaccine strain selection.
